The Benefits of Regular Exercise

Regular physical activity is one of the most important things you can do for your health. Being physically active can improve your brain health, help manage weight, reduce the risk of disease, strengthen bones and muscles, and improve your ability to do everyday activities.

Adults who sit less and do any amount of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity gain some health benefits. Only a few lifestyle choices have as large an impact on your health as physical activity. Everyone can experience the health benefits of physical activity – age, abilities, ethnicity, shape, or size do not matter.

Immediate Benefits: Some benefits of physical activity on brain health happen right after a session of moderate-to-vigorous physical activity. Benefits include improved thinking or cognition for children 6 to 13 years of age and reduced short-term feelings of anxiety for adults. Regular physical activity can help keep your thinking, learning, and judgment skills sharp as you age.

Weight Management: Both eating patterns and physical activity routines play a critical role in weight management. You gain weight when you consume more calories through eating and drinking than the amount of calories you burn, including those burned during physical activity. To maintain your weight, work your way up to 150 minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic activity, 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic activity, or an equivalent mix of the two each week.

Reduce Health Risk: Cardiovascular disease and cancer are two of the leading causes of death. Regular physical activity can reduce your risk of developing these diseases. Physical activity can also reduce your risk of other conditions and chronic diseases.

Strengthen Bones and Muscles: As you age, it's important to protect your bones, joints, and muscles. Not only do they support your body and help you move, but keeping bones, joints, and muscles healthy can help ensure that you're able to do your daily activities and be physically active.

Improve Daily Activities: A common concern of older adults is maintaining their quality of life and being independent as they age. Doing the physical activities you enjoy and that match your abilities can increase your confidence and help you stay independent longer.

Increase Chances of Living Longer: Science shows that physical activity can reduce your risk of dying early from leading causes of death, like heart disease and some cancers. This is remarkable in two ways: Only a few lifestyle choices have as large an impact on your health as physical activity. People who are physically active for about 150 minutes a week have a 33% lower risk of all-cause mortality than those who are physically inactive.

Mental Health Benefits: Regular physical activity can help reduce anxiety and depression. It can also help improve mood and self-esteem. Physical activity can help you sleep better, which is important for overall health and well-being.

Social Benefits: Physical activity, especially when done with others, can provide opportunities for social interaction and building relationships. Team sports, group fitness classes, or simply walking with friends can enhance your social connections and provide emotional support.

